good afternoon and welcome to today's
Downing Street press conference I'm
pleased to be joined by Professor Chris
witty chief medical officer and Sir
Patrick valance chief scientific adviser
on Saturday I spoke to the Prime
Minister I updated him on coronavirus
the progress we're making and our plans
for the next few weeks the government is
united in our focus our determination
and our national mission to defeat the
coronavirus and defeat it we will I want
to join the PM in expressing our
heartfelt thanks to the brilliant
teammates in Thomas's hospital and as
the easter bank holiday weekend draws to
a close I also need to thank all of the
NHS staff all of the other frontline
staff who have been working so hard over
the long weekend to care for those
suffering from coronavirus we thank you
we pay tribute to you and we're
immensely proud of all you're doing and
can I also take the opportunity to thank
everyone who followed the advice to stay
at home despite the wonderful weather
and despite the challenges and the
sacrifices that sticking to the advice
presents to many families I have to say
that at the end of last week we were
concerned that people might start
ignoring the advice or cutting corners
given the temptation to go out into the
sunshine in fact the overwhelming
majority of people stayed at home and
understood the importance of doing so
you stuck to the advice you denied the
coronavirus the social contact it needs
to spread and people should be in
absolutely no doubt that by staying home
this weekend you've saved lives and
you've also helped protect our precious
NHS at this critical moment in the
crisis so thank you your efforts are
making all the difference and please
keep them up we've come too far we've
lost too many loved ones and we've
sacrificed too much to ease up now I can
tell you on the latest data that 290
thousand seven hundred and twenty people
have been tested for coronavirus eighty
eight thousand six hundred and
twenty-one have now tested
and I'm very sorry to say that eleven
thousand three hundred and twenty nine
people have now died from corona virus
every one of them a tragedy and our
hearts go out to all of the loved ones
who are grieving their loss at such a
difficult time amidst this sobering
death toll there are also some positive
signs from the data that we are starting
to win this struggle but we've still got
a long way to go and as those grisly
figures that I just ran out show we
still not past the peak of this virus so
please continue to follow the advice now
more than ever to stay home save lives
and protect our NHS this week sage will
review the evidence of the effectiveness
of the social distancing measures that
we've taken and we will consider their
evidence as that their assessment based
on the evidence at that point I should
say we don't expect to make any changes
to the measures currently in place at
that point and we won't until we're
confident as a confidence we
realistically can be that any such
changes can be safely made in the
meantime the government will continue to
redouble all of our efforts to buy and
deliver the ventilators so we can treat
the most vulnerable in our hospitals to
deliver the master gowns the other
protective equipment to protect those on
the frontline in the NHS but also in
care homes and to ramp up testing so
that NHS and other key staff can return
to the frontline just as soon as
possible the Chancellor and the Business
Secretary are working round the clock to
mitigate the damage that this crisis has
undoubtedly done to our economy getting
support to businesses to workers and to
the most vulnerable in our society so
please once again keep following the
guidance to stay home save lives and
protect the NHS if we let up now the
virus will only take full advantage it
will spread faster and it will kill more
people if we refuse to give in to it if
we keep up this incredible team effort
we will beat this virus and we will come
through this national test
our plan is working please stick with it
and we will get through this crisis
together now I'll hand over to I think
it's krysta or note to Patrick to talk
us through the data today thank you
thank you Patrick
first slide please reminder as the first
secretary has said the aim is to keep
the numbers below NHS capacity to make
sure by doing so we save lives
the mobility change on this slide shows
what we've done what we've all done
we've stayed at home or we've reduced
our activity in terms of retail
recreation transport and in the
workplace with more home working and of
course even reduced the presence in
parks that is having an effect in terms
of reducing the transmission in the
community next slide please
this slide shows the number of new cases
but and this is an important thing to
understand of course it's not all the
cases this is the cases that have been
tested there are many more cases that
have not been tested the blue bars show
the number of cases that have been
tested for medical need and you can see
that even allowing for some vagaries of
the numbers of tests being done
that's at least flattened off and we
would expect that to decrease the orange
bars show the number of people who
tested positive who are in critical care
workers including those in the NHS and
I'm pleased to say there's more testing
going on there that's an important part
of what is happening to detect more
cases and also to be able to tell people
who are negative next slide please
this is in some ways harder data it's
data that actually measures things that
relate directly to the infection and
that is the number of people in hospital
beds with kovat and here you can see as
I've discussed before this is beginning
to flatten off you can see it beginning
to flatten off in many parts of the
country not absolutely everywhere but
you would expect this to continue to
decrease flattened and then start to
decrease as the effects of that social
distancing that we have in place really
feed through into the illness that we're
seeing in hospital
and then finally if I can have the last
slide please
this is the slide of deaths and again it
doesn't carry all deaths in this it
looks at the deaths in hospital and the
reason it looks at deaths in hospital is
that's the international standard and
what everyone else is doing in terms of
reporting deaths there are of course
unfortunately many deaths that also
occur outside hospital
we're tracking behind Italy we're
following the same sort of path what do
I expect to see happen
I think this week's difficult I think
this week we're going to see a further
increase thereafter we should see a
plateau as the effects of the social
distancing come through that plateau may
last for some time and then begin to
decrease that's what we'd expect to see
in this very unfortunate death curve
thank you very much thank you Patrick
David Shipman from the BBC lead off with
the questions thank you very much indeed
two questions if I may one two so
Patrick valence this morning David
Nabarro the World Health Organization
special envoy described the wearing of
masks as becoming a social norm and in
America the Centers for Disease Control
have recommended that the American
public wear masks as a measure against
people who were infected but don't show
symptoms passing on the virus is it
possible that you would change your
advice to the British public about
wearing masks when they're out of doors
but first if I may ask a question to the
first secretary understanding that it's
too early to consider relaxing any of
the measures and could you share with us
any of the specific ideas you're
considering within government for how
those measures might be relaxed when
that time comes well I think it's far
too early to talk about that we're still
as Sir Patrick has explained going
through the peak and we are doing all of
the working government to assess the
evidence will be guided by the science
and the medical advice that we get
and I think until you've got that
evidence we'd be getting ahead of
ourselves
the focus right now particularly after I
think the relative success of
encouraging people to stay home during
the long bank holiday weekend weekend is
to keep up that national effort to keep
the social distancing measures in place
and there will come a time in the future
where we can talk about relaxation or
transition but we're not there now in
answer the question about math so I'm
going to answer first the question that
you posed as if we saw new evidence will
be change our minds to which the answer
is definitely yes that's what science
does it looks at new evidence and we
would give new advice if we sought new
evidence as you know the whao have
stayed with their recommendation around
masks we look at this an update our view
from time to time we're actually looking
at it again now the evidence on masks is
is is much more persuasive for masks
stopping you giving it to somebody that
it is for you preventing from you
catching it we are continuing to look at
new evidence as it emerges and if
there's evidence that looks like we
should change our advice we would do so
David you'd like to come back with a
supplementary yes if I may on on the
question of masks I mean clearly the
growing scientific evidence about
asymptomatic transmission people having
the virus without realizing it and
passing it on has convinced the
Americans of the need to change policy
might that happen here it might do
because we're looking at evidence all
the time and of course it's a
complicated one because yes that do seem
to be people or asymptomatic or
pre-symptomatic by definition of course
they're not also coughing and doing
things that can spread it but this is
all the data that we're looking at at
the moment we have a review ongoing at
the moment of the evidence around masks
and if that review concludes that the
position should change we will of course
make that recommendation and if it stays
the same we will make that clear as well
mark McQuillan from ITV thank you first
secretary you mentioned the lockdown
measures are set to be extended that's
what you've indicated there why is there
no clear plan as yet as to how we get
back to normal once the lockdown is over
and also why is there still no daily
death toll
for the number of people who are dying
outside of hospital well I'll let Chris
talk about how we are measuring the
death toll and the different figures and
we are working assiduously to make sure
that we're ready when the right time
comes but at the moment we are the
evidence suggests that we're still going
through the peak of this crisis where
that's measured on the death count the
death toll or some of the other measures
that sir patrick has talked us through
it's absolutely crucially important that
we do not take our eye off the ball or
the public's focus on the thing that has
been a success so far in relative terms
which is our ability to through
widespread support for our social
distancing measures to deprive this
virus of the means to spread it is
critically important and I think a lot
of people and listening to this at home
would would understand that at there as
we're going through the peak of the
crisis with the death toll at the level
that it's at and increasing we're
absolutely keen to make sure absolutely
determined to keep our eye on the ball
and our focus on what will save lives
which is people staying at home and
protect me and HS in that way
I don't know Chris whether you want to
say anything further or Patrick on the
point about social care homes and NHS
deaths well so in terms of death so the
question was well why do we not
measuring death toll outside hospitals
and the answer is we are so there are
two separate bits of information that
come out whether they come out at
different times the first which is what
we show here and can update on a daily
basis is deaths in hospital and these
are we were able to get those data
relatively fast and they're proven cases
we know that they actually have coded
nineteen from testing and then the
second area of data which is usually
delayed by some days trying to shorten
that period is the ONS data and that
that covers all the people who have
coded as a diagnosis on their death
certificate irrespective of where they
have actually sadly died and those data
do include
deaths at home deaths from care homes
deaths in other areas where the doctor
who has seen them thinks that kovat is
or is likely to be the cause of death or
an important contributor to the cause of
death so those are the two main ways
that we're measuring them at the moment
what would you like to come back on any
of that well I was going to just mention
on the on the deaths outside hospitals
you mentioned there the ways that
they're being calculated will that
information be you know part of the
figures that are released to the public
is there any plan to release that
information when s data is completely
open to the public and always will be
and I think that the other thing which
it is important that in every situation
we look at is not just the Cova direct
deaths with the all cause and mortality
so because some of the way in which a
Ovid is going to be causing death sadly
his doubt is obviously direct from the
virus and some of it in potentially is
from other causes which include things
like people not being able to get into
hospital which is at the moment the
hospitals are operating very effectively
below their ceiling in terms of
emergency care but also things that
might be postponed and also the
long-term effects of the economic and
other effects on people's long-term
health
Victoria McDonald from channel 4
e/b being properly recorded that we may
actually never know the true extent
where you might have people putting
pneumonia when it is covered 19 how can
we overcome that how will we ever see
that true figure we didn't catch the
first bit of it but I think it was on
how can we reliably trap the sources of
deaths from Co mid-nineteen particular
outside the NHS Chris do you want to
touch on that or Patrick well sorry more
specifically it was about the the true
caught the true numbers of death I'm
afraid you've cut out on us I think
we've got the question Chris would you
like to I think that the most important
number in my view actually over the
epidemic as a whole is going to be all
cause mortality
so that's deaths from any sort and
obviously of that some of them all have
been diagnosed by their doctor as having
coded 19 now all the ones that are
diagnosis coded 19 in hospital now and
increasingly it will be true in other
settings that we based on testing so
over time the accuracy of that will
increase our view is at this point in
time most people who have the syndrome
that looks like Ovid probably do have
coded as a syndrome obviously that
wouldn't be so true if we're talking
about the period when the flu season
happens later in the year so
interpreting these data do become more
difficult but ramping up of testing
which is happening will allow us to get
greater accuracy on this over time
tory's you want to come back in I'm not
sure we've got a signal with you but try
again yes do you I hope you can hear me
I was very specifically talking about
deaths and care homes because there is
some concern that especially if a doctor
can't get into that care home that they
are not being recorded properly Patrick
I don't know if you want to one thing I
think is one for Chris Ashley's so the
the obviously everybody who sadly dies
has the doctor will make an assessment
based on her or his view about what the
cause of death is that's what the death
certificate says
in all
cases and doctors take it very seriously
and try to make sure that they get as
much information to give accurate data
now one of the things we want to do is
to extend the amount of testing of
people in care homes as the ability to
test ramps are PO for the next few weeks
because clearly care homes are one of
the areas where there are large numbers
of vulnerable people and that is an area
of risk and therefore we were very much
would like to have much more extensive
testing in that setting and that will
help with this Andy Sparrow from The
Guardian question for SAP a trick and
the question for the first secretary
please sir Patrick you said in your
opening statements that when the death
toll Peaks there will be a plateau and
that that will carry on you said for
some time can you explain a bit more
what you mean by some time are you
talking days you're talking weeks could
that plateau last over a month and first
secretary on the issue of PPP when the
homosexual specters of the weekend a lot
of people weren't very happy when she
was asked to apologize for failings with
PPP and she said she apologized if
people felt that had be failings isn't
it clear now that that has been a
problem not just with distribution but
with supply and why can't ministers just
say just apologize for that we
understand the importance of getting the
PPE to the front line whether it's in
care homes or the NHS we're trying to
give not just the staff on the front
line to equipment but the reassurance
they they need I can I think the
strongest reassurance practical
reassurance that they will want and that
we can give them is that over the bank
holiday weekend over 16 million PP item
items were delivered and we're straining
every sinew to roll them out even
further and faster Patrick do you want
yes so if you look at the effect on
number of cases in the community you'd
expect the measures that have been put
in place to cause quite a sharp decrease
unfortunately with the deaths there's
not only a delay but we would expect
there to be a much more gradual decrease
from the
peak at peak time there and we expect
there to be a bit of a plateau if you
look what's happened in other countries
that's what they've seen that's what
we'd expect you'd expect that to go on
for two or three weeks but I can't be
absolutely sure on the time of that we'd
like to follow up there Andy when we're
not hearing you okay I'm afraid we'll
we'll have to move on to Martin Brown
from The Daily Express undersecretary I
just want to take you back to your
opening remarks but you said our plan is
working and but we've been we've seen so
far the testing has been slow
the government's frantically trying to
get ventilators frontline NHS staff are
still struggling to get hold of PPE and
some experts predicting that Britain
will have the worst death rate from
coronavirus in Europe so was this all
part of the plan and support Rick and
professor Witte what specific evidence
you're looking for scientifically and
evident to you looking forward to reopen
schools and you think it would be wise
that the UK follows a European example
and open schools so soon after there
suppose in peak so Martin the two
crucial things in terms of as we've
always argued flattening the peak and
making sure the NHS can cope is on the
one hand getting people to follow the
guidelines about social distancing
they've showed the forbearance the
sacrifice which has allowed us to to
deliver on that it's been a national
effort a lot of people have particularly
when you think of the warm weather
people with young families that's been a
success in terms of delivering on that
side of things and that has helped limit
the spread I know it's difficult when
you look at the death toll and those
figures but we are seeing signs of a
tentative signs of a flattening out and
that was the original plan the second
thing is making sure that the NHS has
got the capacity indeed some head
whether it's critical care beds or the
ventilators that can support those who
need it and on those two key aspects and
I'm not saying there haven't been
challenges right across the the range of
different things that we've got to
achieve but on those two critical
aspects actually we've got ourselves
into a good place and so the key thing
is to keep delivering on that plan in
terms of timing of changes I think it's
really important that we're now at a
stage when you can begin to see the
flattening we'll look and see where the
peak is and when we are firmly the other
side of it in terms of numbers coming
down only at that stage do you start
looking at what measures might be
released and how they might be released
it would be a complete waste of
everything that everyone's had to do
till now and I absolutely understand the
difficulties that some of the decisions
make but it would be a waste if we were
to rapidly reverse that and lead to a
reemergence of this the key is to keep
that r-value below 1 and to see this on
the way down
once it gets above 1 you start to get
this exponential growth again which we
cannot afford to have nobody can and
therefore the timing of these decisions
including things around schools will
have to be taken in the light of
evidence and data as it emerges of
course if we took our hand our foot off
the pedal too early if we eased up too
early would risk a second wave and that
would be particularly damaging and would
I think even for businesses some of whom
were particularly concerned have been
asking for more clarity I think would be
particularly damaging for them so we
want to take the right decisions as
we've always said at the right time
would you like to come back on any of
that
if I may just on the r-value actually so
Patrick are we how close are we to
getting towards that we nearer nearer
the 1 and 2 for example well I think as
I've said recently I think in the
community you'd expect the are now to be
below 1 in general and we're going to
review that again this week but that's
what you'd expect in the community
it doesn't mean overall it's below 1
because we know that there are cases in
care homes and in hospitals where
they're still in
being being picked up but in the
community with the if the distancing in
place the are is expected to be below
one can I sent a Patrick McGuire from
the New Statesman good evening professor
witty you said that one intern care
homes were infected
last week have you any advance on that
figure is it going up or is it going
down and how can you accurately model
the spread given that testing is so
haphazard and first secretary and what
sort of economic modeling have you done
on the various lockdown exit scenarios
doctor to Chris go ahead on care homes
so at the moment the total number
cumulatively
across the whole country is around
thirteen point five percent overall and
in the last 24 hours that have been
ninety two care homes where an outbreak
has been detected so that that's a
direct answer to your question in terms
of testing of course if an outbreak is
suspected then the public health
authorities will go in and do testing to
assess whether an outbreak has occurred
and that is going on you know all the
time and has gone on through this and
that allows the care home staff who are
absolutely fantastic and are doing a
very difficult job
you know for the benefit of the people
who live with them they can then isolate
people who are symptomatic and try and
make sure that this does not spread with
indicate okay and practical your other
question we're looking at all the data
with its economic health social outcomes
in relation to all of the measures that
we've got in place and indeed when the
time is right we will look at them in
term in terms of any changes we've made
but we're not there yet and as I said we
want to keep the focus on maintaining
the social distancing measures for all
the reasons that I think have been
backed up by Sir Patrick and Chris today
would you like to come back on any of
that yes just on the question of PPE in
combs there have been complaints about
cost from care homes how you ensuring
that cost is no barrier for care homes
in terms of them getting adequate PPE
and especially with the demands on
hospice
sort of how you prioritizing what goes
wearing it what caste okay cost hasn't
been the major challenge for us it is
supply because it's a very competitive
market out there because there's so much
demand for it and also I think
particularly with care homes some of the
local distribution so we've had last
week one drop of bulk P P to local
resilience forums and we've got another
one this week just to be clear about
what that means it's a bulk drop to a
group of body that can then make sure
that they get to the individual local
authorities and local care homes that
really need them we set up a hotline so
when there are distribution challenges
and we we recognize that there have been
some that they can be unblocked as
quickly as possible
so we're doing everything we can and I
chaired a meeting this morning on it
it's something we're looking at a daily
basis reading everything we can to try
and get the PPE where its most needed
and I think we're on to Adam en cough
from Business Insider please this is a
question both to the first secretary of
state and to the scientific and medical
advisors more than 11,000 people have
died now in UK hospitals after
contracting the coronavirus have the
right government's own scientific
advisors this is Jeremy fire suggested a
but the UK's of course to being one of
the worst if not the worst affected
country in Europe does the government
now accept that it could should have
acted soon in locking down the country
and in hindsight did the scientific and
medical advisors believes they should
have pushed harder for the government to
make that decision earlier and if I had
have done so what could lives have been
lost have now been saved well I'm going
to defer to and the scientific and
medical experts I'm not sure though that
that is comparing like with like either
on the data that we've got all the other
underlying data and that we've been
looking at Patrick would you like to
address that further the aim all along
and clearly yeah so Jeremy far has been
part of the group has been to get the
numbers down make sure that we keep the
numbers below NHS capacity and ensure
therefore that the NHS can function and
that has been an absolute aim in this
and so far that is exactly where we are
in terms of keeping this under control
with heroic efforts from the NHS
including increasing capacity
and the superhuman efforts of the
doctors and nurses and all the others
who look after the patient's the direct
comparison around things I think we need
to wait and see how things evolve
there's a lot long way to go yet in this
disease it's still a new disease it
still hasn't spread everywhere across
the world it still hasn't actually been
allowed to be released from places that
have got locked down so I think we've
got a lot yet to see in terms of where
this ends up clearly it's going to be
very important that we concentrate on
things like vaccine and therapeutics to
get there I think the measures that
we've got in place are holding it in the
right position in terms of keeping
numbers down and NHS capacity at the
moment Adam did you want to come back I
accept that you cannot always make
direct comparisons between countries I
think if you look at some of the
countries that actually much sooner than
the UK South Korea in particular when
you had a fraction of the deaths that
we've seen UK isn't it isn't it clear
that had reacted sooner days or even
weeks earlier than we did that it would
have made a difference in terms of lives
lost I don't think it is clear I don't
think those comparisons are like for
like because of a where we are on the
curve is Sir Patrick is mentioned but
also the individual circumstance in
those countries but we will continue to
monitor and we do monitor what's going
on in other countries and make sure we
feed that into what we're doing here
Patrick I don't has anything else do
that to that no I think it's very
difficult to make those comparisons and
as I say we'll make those be able to
look and see this in due course I think
there's a lot to learn from other
countries in terms of what we need to do
and we're definitely looking very
closely at other countries in terms of
how they think about release of lock
bound measures thanks Adam thank you
very much
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News